docs: Technical Architecture Evolution blog post (#3521)
opensource-observer/oso: apps/docs/blog/2025-04-02-oso-architecture/index.md

Even the mart models being served from the API were over 100GB+ in size.
The Postgres database we used for serving was struggling to keep up with queries,
even with basic lookups.
The breaking point came when the job to create indices kept failing
for our larger tables (e.g. `artifacts_by_project_v1`).

We originally chose Postgres as the safe, most common option,
but it was increasingly clear its limitations as a
[OLTP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_transaction_processing)
database. We wanted to switch to an
[OLAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_analytical_processing)
database, optimized for analytics queries.
After evaluating some options,
we ended up choosing [Clickhouse](https://clickhouse.com/),
which has built a reputation for low-latency snappy
analytics queries, suitable for frontends.

## Phase 5: Replacing custom indexing with dlt

We quickly outgrew what we could do with just the available public datasets.
Beyond establishing our own ELT ingest for Superchain data,
we also needed to ingest
[Farcaster](https://www.farcaster.xyz/),
[Gitcoin](https://www.gitcoin.co/),
[OpenRank](https://openrank.com/), and
[EAS](https://attest.org/) data.

> We evaluate a number of different data movement tools,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We evaluated a number of different data movement tools,
```

Instead, we ended up writing our own semantic layer metrics factory
on top of [sqlmesh](https://sqlmesh.com/).
sqlmesh is a drop-in replacement for dbt, with a number of additional powerful
features, including Python macros (bye bye Jinja),
automatic translation between SQL dialects,
and the ability to auto-matically generate new models using Python.
These features were the fundamental unlock that enabled us to build our own
semantic layer and metrics system.
We built so much on the bleeding edge of metrics
that the team behind sqlmesh invited us to speak at their annual
[Tobiko conference](https://groupby.tobikodata.com/).

Our initial experiments ran the metrics pipeline on a separate
Clickhouse cluster, so that we could continue supporting the existing
mature dbt/BigQuery pipeline.
The experiment convinced us of 2 things:

1. sqlmesh is the future of data transformation

> 2. Clickhouse is great for serving, but too slow/costly for the backend pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Clickhouse is great for serving, but lack of fast deletes and it's eventually consistent nature weren't a good fit for sqlmesh and the dataset we were analyzing. 
```
